# Saiz *et al*. (2020) 

This repository contains the data and code associated with the article by Saiz *et al.*, *Growth factor-mediated coupling between lineage size and cell fate choice underlies robustness of mammalian development*, currently deposited in [bioRXiv](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2019.12.27.889006v1).

The repository tries to follow a standard structure, mostly based on the [Cookiecutter Data Science](https://drivendata.github.io/cookiecutter-data-science/#cookiecutter-data-science) project and other best practices recommendations. This repository was made post-hoc, in 2019, based on rawer code written between 2017 and 2019 (sorry - trying to be better).

A couple of notebooks are still missing as well as the uncorrected, original files. It will be completed shortly. If you need a specific piece of data in the meantime, don't hesitate to ask. 

## Repository structure:  

* ```README.md``` - you're reading it
* ```.Rprofile``` - contains global settings and options for RStudio.
* ```regdev_project.Rproj``` - RStudio project. If open with RStudio in the main directory where all files are, it should allow to reproducibly run all scripts, analyses and create graphs. If you clone the repository, it should work out of the box. 
* /packrat - contains logs and package library for this project, as created with the [packrat](http://rstudio.github.io/packrat/) R package.
* /data
   * /corfiles - manually curated files, corrected for over and undersegmentation, as described in [Morgani *et al.*, (2018) *Dev Bio*](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2018.06.017).
   * /interim - intermediate tables to be read in by other scripts. Currently em
pty. Files are generated by transformation scripts in ```/src```.
   * /mined-data - data extracted from other studies:
      * *Fgf4* allelic series from Kang *et al* (2013) [*Development*](https://dev.biologists.org/content/140/2/267), as well as data on *Sox17* and *Pdgfra* allelic series from Artus *et al* [(2011)](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.12.007) and [(2010)](https://dev.biologists.org/content/137/20/3361).
      * *Gata6* allelic series from Schrode *et al* (2014) [*Dev Cell*](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2014.04.011).
      * *Fgfr1; Fgfr2* allelic series from Kang *et al* (2017) [*Dev Cell*](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2017.05.003).
      * *Gata4* allelic series generated by myself (unpublished).
   * /moviefiles - tracking data for time lapse movies generated in this study. Each folder (or groups of folders, see naming) contains data files for one movie.
   * /processed - processed files where data has been transformed and cells classified, typically output of ```*_tx.R``` or ```*_classify.R``` scripts. Currently contains files generated by my testing of the code. You may empty the folder and generate them all from scratch.
   * /raw - unprocessed files resulting from running ```*_read.R``` scripts on corresponding ```/corfiles``` (combine corfiles and count cell numbers).
   * /uncorfiles - original data files generated by MINS segmentation. Currently
 empty. Will be updated in time.
* /figures - contains plots generated during analysis, used for the paper figures.
* /results - contains tables and results generated during analysis
* /notebooks - contains interactive Jupyter notebooks detailing the main the data transformations
   * ```Z-correction.ipyn``` compares raw with transformed data after correcting for fluorescence decay along the Z-axis
   * ```nanogata-tx.ipyn``` describes the conversion of NANOG and GATA6 intensitiy levels obtained with different antibodies to a common scale
* /references - contains the experimental reference files (metadata), generated manually as logs over the course of experimentation:
   * ```*_exp_ref.csv``` are files with experimental data for each experiment, such as experimental date, experimental group, etc
   * ```*_if.csv``` are files containing details about the antibodies used to stain the corresponding embryos in each experiment
  It also contains other reference files generated during the analysis.
* /src - contains source code to use in the project
   * ```*_runall.R``` files run all steps in the pipeline for the corresponding dataset (read, transform, classify and count cells). 
   * ```plotting-aes.R``` sets up a few objects that are used in plots throughout the project.
   * ```setup.R``` loads the basic packages used in all scripts, runs ```plotting-aes.R``` and sets a seed for reproducibility.
   * /data - scripts that read in and transform data tables
      - ```*_read.R``` read in files in ```./data/corfiles```, combine them, clean them and count cells. Generate ```*-raw.csv``` files stored in ```./data/raw```.
      - ```*_tx.R``` apply transformations to data generated by ```*_read.R```. Generate ```*-tx.csv``` files stored in ```./data/interim```.
      - ```*_classify.R``` classify cells in ```*_tx.csv``` data tables into populations as necessary. Generate ```*-processed.csv``` files stored in ```./data/processed```.
      - ```*_counter.R``` count number of cells in each lineage in ```*-processed.csv``` data tables and writes them to ```./data/processed```. 
   * /functions - scripts defining functions used throughout analysis to perform data transformations, classification, etc.
   * /models - scripts that fit models to transform some of the data.
   * /visualization - scripts to generate the plots in the figures of the paper. Output files are stored in ```./figures```.

## Usage

Clone repository using ```git clone``` as usual. The file ```regdev_project.Rproj``` should allow you to open and run all scripts and functions and reproducibly generate data tables and figures. Packages are handled by packrat and the working directory by the .Rproj file. If you encounter any bug or issues please reach out.
